Linux-Interview-Questions

General Concepts :

1 .What is Linux?
Ans :- Linux is operating system which providers environment to run application.

2 .What are the differences between Linux and Windows and Unix?
Linux -: The source code of linux is freely available to its user 
          It is portable and can be execute to different harddrive
          Linux primarlily used for GUI and CUI (Graphycal User Interface) (command line interface)
Unix :-  The source code of unix is not available for general users
          unix is not portable
          Unix is only used for CUI (Command line inerface)
Windows : - Windows is a properitaty operating system developed by microsoft 
            Its source code is not accessible for public
            User must purchase the license to use it 

3 . What is the Linux kernel ?
Ans :- The kernal is the program that actually communicate with hardware combining shell and kernal form operating sysytem

4. What are the advantages of using Linux ?
Ans :- Linux is open source its source code freely available to view modify and distribute.
       Linux is known for stability and reability 
        Linux is more secure as compare to unix 
        it is freely available to use 
        
5 . What are the different types of Linux distributions ?
 ANS :- There are multiple types of distributions for eg.
  Ubantu 
  Linux Mint
  Debian
  Fedora
  Red Hat enterprices
  Slackware linux etc.


6 .Explain the Linux architecture ?
Ans :- There are 4 stages in linux architecture
  1.Application layer :-User intract with system through varies application eg. ofc,games this application run outer layes of structure
  2.Shell provides environment to run any application it provides interface to the user to ineract with hardware
  3.Kernal is program which actually communicate with hardware combining shell and kernal form operating system
  4.Hardware is component such as motherboard CPU,Harddisk etc are comes under this layer

7. What is shell ?
ANS :- Shell provides environment to run any application it provides interface to user to interact with hardware 

#Basic Commands :

8 . What command is used to display the current date and time?
ANs :- (date) command use to display current date and time (date -u )command used to display date in UTC form 

9. What is the purpose of the ls command?
ANS :- ls command in linux is used to list file and directories.

10 .How do you create a new directory and file in Linux?
ANS :- using mkdir command you can create directory and using touch command we cand create file 

11. How do you copy files and directories?
ANS:- To copy file we use cp command (cp source destination ) to copy directiory we use (cp -r source destination) 

12. What is the difference between cp and mv commands?
ANS :-cp command used to copy file from source to destination and mv command use to move file from one source to destination 
also used to rename file 
      
13. How do you delete files and directories in Linux?
ANS :- rm filename  to delete file and folder 
rmdir to delete directory 
rm -v to view and delete file 
rm -vf to delete forcefully as well as view 
rm * to delete all file 
rm -r to delete all recurcive file and folder or non empty file or folder

14 .What is the command to rename the file?
ANS :- mv command is used to rename file (mv file or foldername and change name  )


15 . Which commands do you used to read the file?
to read file we can use cat command (cat file name)

16 . What is the difference between head and tail command?
   ANS:- The head command is used to display first part of file it default display top 10 lines(head filename)
      tail command is used to display last 10 line of the file 

17 . How will you list the hidden files?
 ANS:-To list hidden file ls -a source

18 . What is the purpose of the cat command?
ANcat command is used to display content of the file. 

19 . What is command to check kernel name and version?
ANS :- uname -r 

20. What is the use of tree command?
ANS:-Tree command is used to visualize directory structure and orgnised the file and directory 

21 . How will you check current working directory?
Using pws command we can check present working directory.

22 . What does the alias command do?
ANS:- alias is user define shortcut for longer command 

#Linux File System Hierarchy :

23 . What is the purpose of the root (/) directory in Linux?
 ANS :- all the files and directories are located under the root directory 

24 . What is the difference between /bin and /sbin?
ANS:- /bin directory contains binaries that are essential to the operating system.
/sbin directory stores the binaries required by the operating system for system management. 

25 . What is the purpose of the /etc directory?
directory is used to store system-wide configuration files. These files are essential for 
configuring the behavior of the operating system and installed applications

26 . What type of files are stored in the /home directory?
ANS:- The home directory contains the user data and user-specific configuration files

27. What is the use of the /root directory?
ANS :- The root directory is the starting point for all user directories. In simple words, 
all the files and directories are located under the root directory in Linux. Moreover, 
the root directory is the only directory that is guaranteed to exist on the system, and all 
other directories are created as subdirectories of the root directory.

28 . What is the difference between a relative path and an absolute path in the Linux file system?
ANS:- A relative path specifies the location of a file or directory in relation to the current working directory.
Unlike an absolute path, which starts from the root directory, a relative path does not begin with a slash ('/') and utilizes 
navigational shortcuts to refer to the file or directory


29 . How can you check the disk usage of a specific directory?
to check disk usage we can use du -h command 

30 . What is the default mount point for external devices in Linux?
Mounting is the process of attaching a storage device or partition to a directory or mount point so that its contents 
can be accessed and managed by computer system users.

#Vim editor :

30 . What is Vim editor?
Vim, short for Vi IMproved, is a highly configurable text editor built to enable efficient text editing.
It’s an enhanced version of the Vi editor, which was developed back in the 1970s. Vim is widely used by programmers,
system administrators, and anyone who spends a significant amount of time working in the terminal

31 . What are the different modes in Vim?
There are six modes in vim editior 
1.Normal mode :- In Vim, Normal mode is your starting point for navigating and controlling text.
2.Insert mode:-nsert Mode in Vim is where the magic happens – it's the space where you actively insert and manipulate your text.
3.Ex mode:-an integral part of Vim, provides a powerful platform for executing advanced commands with a focus on line-oriented operations.
4.Visual mode :- Visual mode in Vim empowers users to precisely select and manipulate text,
offering flexibility in the types of selections made
5.Command line mode :- Command-Line mode is for executing complex commands and performing various tasks.
6.Replace mode :- Replace mode in Vim provides a focused environment for substituting existing text with new content,
ensuring a seamless and controlled editing process.

32 . How do you switch between insert mode and command mode?
ANS :- Insert mode :- command for insert is i and if you want to switch to command mode we can use esc button.

33. By default which mode get open when you use the vim editor?
By default normal mode get open when you use vim editor.

34. How do you copy and paste text in Vim?
Vim has its own terminology for copying, cutting, and pasting. Copy is called yank (y), 
cut is called delete (d), and paste is called put (p).

35 . How do you delete a line in Vim?
ANS :- Press the Esc key to go to normal mode.
Place the cursor on the line you want to delete.
Type dd and hit Enter to remove the line.
Pressing dd multiple times will delete multiple lines.

36 . To delete a line in Vim, you can use the dd command:
Press the Esc key to go to normal mode.
Place the cursor on the line you want to delete.
Type dd and hit Enter to remove the line.
Pressing dd multiple times will delete multiple lines.

37. How do you undo and redo changes in Vim?
To undo changes in Vim, you need to:
Go to command mode by pressing Esc key.
Press the u key to undo the changes.
To undo multiple changes, prepend u with a number, like 5u to undo the five recent changes.
To redo the last undone change, simply press Ctrl + r.

38 . How do you exit Vim without saving changes?
To exit Vim without saving changes, you need to switch to command mode by pressing the Esc key. 
Then, press : (colon) to open the prompt bar in the bottom left corner of the window.
Type q! after the colon and hit Enter to exit without saving the changes

39 . How do you exit Vim with saving changes?
nd then you can use the following options:
:w – Save the changes but don’t exit
:wq – Save and quit
:q – Just Quit (if you have unsaved changes, you’ll see this warning: E37: No write since last change (add ! to override))
:q! – Force quit (it will discard any unsaved changes)

40 . How do you search for a specific word or pattern in a file?
In the most basic form, you use grep to match literal patterns within a text file.
This means that if you pass grep a word to search for, it will print out every line in the file containing that word.
Execute the following command to use grep to search for every line that contains the word GNU:

41 . How do you perform a search and replace in Vim?
First, you need to open a document in Vim and then, enter command mode. After this, 
vim will switch to search mode and whatever you will type after '/', vim will search its first occurrence in the document.
/Search word.
To replace a searched word in vim, we have the :substitute command or :s in short. The syntax is as follows:
%s/search_word/replace_word/g
%s - The first part after ':' decides the scale of replace. It can either be for the entire document (%), 
specific line numbers (e.g 3), or a range of lines (e.g. 3,7). The 's' is for the substitute command.
search_word - The next field followed by the '/' is the word we want to replace, 
you can use the default searching, regex searching or exact word searching here.
replace_word - Next, it is takes the world we want to replace the searched word.
g - These are extra options; here 'g' means global which will replace every occurence in 
all specified lines instead of the first occurence. Also, there is an option 'c' which asks for confirmation at every search.

42 . How do you move to the beginning or end of a line in Vim?
Press the Esc key to be in the normal mode.
Press the 0 key to move the cursor to the beginning of the line (column 0)
Press $ key to move the cursor to the end of the line (last column).

43 . How do you enable line numbers in Vim?
Absolute Line Numbering in Vim/Vi
Relative Line Numbering
Hybrid Line Numbering
Permanently Enable Vim Line Numbers

44 . What is the use of visual mode and how will you open it?
The Visual mode allows you to visually highlight (select) specific text areas and run commands on them.
To enter the Visual mode from the Normal mode, you can press on v—which will mark the beginning of the selection—and then
use the arrow keys to move the cursor to the desired end of the selection.

#User Management :

45 . How do you create a new user in Linux?
useradd or adduser is a command line utility that can be used to create new users in Linux and Unix systems.

46 . What is the purpose of the /etc/passwd file?
The /etc/passwd file is the most important file in Linux operating system. 
This file stores essential information about the users on the system. 

47 . How do you delete a user in Linux?
To delete users using the userdel command, you need to be logged in as root or a user with sudo access.

48 . How do you modify user information in Linux?
usermod command or modify user is a command in Linux that is used to change 
the properties of a user in Linux through the command line

49 . What is the purpose of the /etc/shadow file?
The /etc/shadow file stores actual password in encrypted format for user’s account with additional properties related to user password 
i.e. it stores secure user account information. All fields are separated by a colon (:) symbol. 
It contains one entry per line for each user listed in /etc/passwd file.

50 . How do you change a user's password in Linux?
To change the password for another user, you need to use the passwd command followed by the username of the user 
whose password you want to change.
For example, to change the password for a user named linuxize, you would run: sudo passwd linuxize

51 . What is the command to list all users in Linux?
ANS :-  use the awk command with -F option

52 . How do you lock and unlock a user account?
ANS :- In Linux, we can use the "passwd" command with the "-l" option to lock a user account. 
This option locks a user account, preventing the user from logging in.
passwd -l to lock the user 
usermod --lock username
chage -l username

53. How do you switch to another user in Linux?
In Linux, switching users in the terminal is a common task, especially for system administrators. 
There are several commands to achieve this, primarily su and sudo.

How do you view information about the currently logged-in user?
What is the purpose of the /etc/skel directory?
How do you view and modify a user's account expiration?
What is the meaning of minimum, maximum and warning days of user password?

#Group Management :

What is a group in Linux, and why is it used?
In Linux, there can be multiple users (those who use/operate the system), 
and groups are nothing but a collection of users. Groups make it easy to manage users with the 
same security and access privileges. A user can be part of different groups. The ‘groups’ command is 
a powerful tool that allows administrators to view the group memberships of a user and retrieve information about user groups on a Linux 
System.

How do you create a new group in Linux?
To create a new group, use the groupadd command

How do you delete a group in Linux?
The groupdel command is used to delete an existing group from the system ex. groupdel option groupname 

What is the purpose of the /etc/group file?
The /etc/group file stores group information and is the default configuration file.

How do you add a user to a group?
How do you remove a user from a group?
What is a primary group and a supplementary group?
How do you change a user's primary group?
How do you view the groups a user belongs to?
How do you change group ownership of a file or directory?
How do you change the password of group?

#File Permissions and Access Control :

What is the difference between user, group, and others in file permissions?
What is the meaning of Read, Write and execute permission over file and directory?
How do you change ownership of a file or directory?
How do you view file permissions in Linux?
How may types files in Linux system?
How do you set permissions using chmod with examples?
How many type of link files in Linux system?
What is the difference between hard link and Soft link?

#Archive and Compression :

What is the purpose of archive?
Archive files are used to collect multiple data files together into a single file for easier portability and storage,
or simply to compress files to use less storage space. Archive files often store directory structures, 
error detection and correction information, comments, and some use built-in encryption.

Which tool do you used for archiving the files?
What is compression?
Which tools do you used for compression the data?
How will you archive and compress the data in single command?

#Scheduling task :

What is task scheduling, and why is it important?
Which tool do you used for scheduled the task non-periodically?
What is crontab, and How will you use it?
What are the fields of crontab?
How do you list the crontab jobs?

#Search and Filter utility in Linux :

What is the use of sort command?
ANS :- Sort command is use to sort contents of the text file line by line 

What is the use of uniq command?
ANS :- The uniq command line utility that is used to report or filter out the reapeted line in file.

What is the use of wc command?
ANS :- wc(word count) this command is used to count words charachter and bytes in files.

How will you find the path of file or directory in Linux file system?

What is the use of grep command?
ANS:- The grep command in Unix/Linux is a powerful tool used for searching and manipulating text patterns within files.

#Process management :

How do you view running processes in Linux?
The ps command is one of the most commonly used commands to display information about running processes.

What is the difference between foreground and background processes?
ANS:- A process that connects to the terminal is called a foreground job. 
A job is said to be in the foreground because it can communicate with the user via the screen and the keyboard.
On the other hand, a process that disconnects from the terminal and cannot communicate with the user is called a background job


How do you terminate a process in Linux?
What is a daemon in Linux?
What are the shell jobs?
What are the process state in Linux?

#Networking:

How do you check your IP address in Linux?
How do you test network connectivity?
What is SSH, and how is it used?
What is the difference between static IP and dynamic IP?
